Training for gender equality and women's empowerment
Photo: UN Women Training Centre
Photo: UN Women Training Centre
Training for gender equality and women’s empowerment is an essential component for UN Women’s commitment to advance gender equality and women’s empowerment.

Training for gender equality is a transformative process that aims to provide knowledge, techniques and tools to develop skills and changes in attitudes and behaviours. It is a continuous and long-term process that requires political will and commitment of all parties in order to create inclusive societies that recognize the need to promote gender equality.

Training is a tool, strategy, and means to effect individual and collective transformation towards gender equality by raising awareness and encouraging learning, knowledge-building and skills development. It helps women and men to understand the role gender plays and to acquire the knowledge and skills necessary for advancing gender equality in their daily lives and work. Training for gender equality is part and parcel of delivering our commitments to equal human rights for all.

The approach of UN Women’s Training Centre to training for gender equality is guided by key international normative instruments, in particular the:

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW)
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
Our Solutions
The UN Women Training Centre provides high-quality training courses, programmes and resources on key issues related to UN Women’s priorities as well as emerging topics. We foster and employ innovative, participatory learning approaches and methodologies. We work with diverse partners around the world to ensure the quality and effectiveness of our training services and products.

Our mission is to support the UN and other stakeholders to realize commitments to gender equality, women’s empowerment and women’s rights through transformative training and learning.

For more information about the UN Women Training Centre, contact us. Follow the training for gender equality conversation on Twitter at #UNWomenTC.