UNESCO and its partners work to provide solutions to reduce inequalities in and through education, to empower women in science and technology for environmental action, to promote inclusion and combat gender-based violence, to bridge the digital gender divide and to support women’s empowerment in crisis, emergency and early recovery contexts.

UNESCO is committed to gender equality as a human rights issue and a precondition for sustainable people-centered development. It is at the core of UNESCO’s conviction of how to build lasting peace.

Advancing gender equality across all areas of UNESCO’s mandate worldwide
UNESCO2025
As part of its Global Priority Gender Equality, UNESCO publishes every two years a comprehensive report showcasing progress in advancing the rights of women and girls across its mandate. The new edition, UNESCO in Action for Gender Equality 2024–2025, highlights results and impact from across the Organization’s work, illustrating how UNESCO drives change with its partners worldwide — as a laboratory of ideas, a clearinghouse, a standard-setter, a catalyst for international cooperation, and a capacity builder — while supporting Member States in translating its gender equality commitment into concrete action.

0000396066
Highlights
Promoting gender equality through multilateral collaboration
UNESCO and partners reaffirm their commitment to gender equality

International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women

Global Survey on Women, Culture and Emergencies
Making cultural policies workfor gender equality
Villarroya, AnnaUNESCOOllé, Berta2025
Culture is now widely recognized as a global public good. Yet, a critical question remains: is it a public good for all? This first-of-its-kind toolkit offers effective actionable strategies for advancing gender equality in the cultural and creative sectors. It promotes a rights-based approach, affirming that all individuals have the right to access, participate in, and contribute to cultural life. With step-by-step guidance, real-life best practices, and scenarios, it equips policymakers with the tools to drive meaningful, measurable and transformative change for all. 

0000395703
Calls for Action

UNITE TO END VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
Violence against women and girls remains the most prevalent and pervasive human rights violation worldwide. UNESCO aims to create safe and inclusive digital spaces for them.


GENDER EQUALITY TO SOLVE THE CLIMATE EMERGENCY
Climate emergencies are never gender neutral. To advance the multilateral agenda for gender equality and climate justice, UNESCO calls for decisive actions.


HOW TO COMBAT ONLINE GENDERED DISINFORMATION?
UNESCO urges the implementation of strategies to create safer digital spaces for women and girls, with a focus on combating the rapidly emerging harmful narratives that are spreading at an unprecedented pace.


AT THE HEART OF TOMORROW'S CULTURAL POLICIES
This Call for Action outlines concrete measures that Ministers of Culture can take to address the challenges faced by women in the cultural sector


FOOTBALL: INVESTING IN WOMEN
This Call for Action aims to accelerate investments for women in football, urging stakeholders to implement gender-responsive policies, investments and activities that can demonstrate the full potential of millions of women and girls worldwide.

IDWM 2024Fabrice Monteiro / Institute
Women in science, not in silence: pioneering change in the global climate crisis
Climate emergencies are not gender neutral. In fact, the degradation of the planet’s natural systems has a disproportionate effect on women and girls.

Key figures
133
million girls
about 1 in 5, are out of school

640
million women
have experienced physical and sexual violence

5%
of all sports media content
is dedicated to women’s sports

1 in 2
women researchers
have faced sexual harassment during their careers

Making Artificial Intelligence Testing Widely Accessible
Chowdhury, RummanUNESCOSkeadas, TheodoraLakshmi, DhanyaAmos, Sarah2025
Bias in artificial intelligence can reinforce stereotypes and contribute to harms such as technology-facilitated gender-based violence (TFGBV). This Red Teaming Playbook offers a concrete and collaborative method for identifying these risks in generative AI systems and helping to mitigate them in support of the social good.

0000394338
Latest news

News
UNESCO and ET Cube hold first Pacific bootcamp on entrepreneurship for young scientists
25 November 2025

News
UNESCO Peru launches the campaign "UNITE: for a web without violence"
25 November 2025

Story
Advancing women’s literacy for leadership and peacebuilding in South Sudan’s security sector
25 November 2025

Story
Harnessing the power of Genomics to defeat malaria
24 November 2025
UNESCO in numbers
19% of UNESCO’s budget
is dedicated to gender equality

44
UNESCO chairs and networks
on gender equality

34
intangible cultural heritage elements
directly linked to gender equality

20
women scientists
awarded every year through the L’Oréal-UNESCO For Women in Science Programme

100
displaced women artists
supported through residency and livehood opportunities, inside and outside Ukraine

13
biospheres reserves
training women on beekeeping

10
Goodwill Ambassadors
working on gender equality

Our stories

Story
Advancing women’s literacy for leadership and peacebuilding in South Sudan’s security sector

Story
Harnessing the power of Genomics to defeat malaria

Story
Decoding malaria: A molecular journey to outsmart a parasite

Story
A molecular biologist’s battle against antimicrobial resistance
International Days
International Women's Day

International Day of Women in Multilateralism


International Day of Women and Girls in Science


International Day of the Girl Child